README.md, before:

# Apigee Migration Assessment Tool

[![Static Checks](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/static-checks.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/static-checks.yml)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/tests.yml)

This tool helps you plan your migration from Apigee Edge, Apigee X, or Apigee Hybrid to a target Apigee X or Apigee Hybrid environment by analyzing your source Apigee setup and generating a comprehensive assessment report.

## Assessment Scenarios

The following migration paths are supported:

| Source Apigee Platform | Target Apigee Platform |
| :--------------------- | :--------------------- |
| Apigee Edge (SaaS)     | Apigee X               |
| Apigee Edge (SaaS)     | Apigee Hybrid          |
| Apigee Edge (OPDK)     | Apigee X               |
| Apigee Edge (OPDK)     | Apigee Hybrid          |
| Apigee Hybrid          | Apigee X               |
| Apigee X               | Apigee Hybrid          |

## Prerequisites

You can run this tool locally using Python or via a Docker container.

### Local Setup

1.  **Install Graphviz:** Follow the official installation instructions for your operating system from [graphviz.org/download/](https://graphviz.org/download/).
2.  **Create and activate a Python virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv dev
    source dev/bin/activate
    ```
    *(Note: On Windows, use `dev\Scripts\activate`)*
3.  **Install Python dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

### Docker Setup

1.  **Use a pre-built Docker image (recommended):**
    ```bash
    docker pull ghcr.io/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/apigee-migration-assessment-tool:latest
    ```
    **OR**

    **Build the Docker image from source:**
    ```bash
    # Build the image
    docker build -t <your-image-name>:<your-tag> .

    # (Optional) Push to your container registry
    # docker push <your-image-name>:<your-tag>
    ```

2.  **Run the Docker image:**
    *(See the "Running the Tool with Docker" section below for detailed examples.)*

## Apigee Permissions

The tool requires specific permissions to access and analyze your Apigee environments.

*   **Source: Apigee Edge (SaaS/OPDK)**
    *   Assign the `Read-only Organization Administrator` role to the user account that will be used by the tool.
    *   Refer to the [Apigee Edge built-in roles documentation](https://docs.apigee.com/api-platform/system-administration/edge-built-roles) for more details.

*   **Source/Target: Apigee X/Hybrid**
    *   The tool needs read-only access to organization and environment-level objects, plus permissions to validate APIs. Assign the following to the relevant user or service account:
        *   The built-in role: `roles/apigee.readOnlyAdmin`
        *   A custom role with the `apigee.proxies.create` permission. You can create this role using gcloud:
            ```bash
            gcloud iam roles create ApigeeAPIValidator --project=<YOUR_GCP_PROJECT_ID> \
              --title="Apigee API Validator" --description="Allows Apigee API proxy creation for validation" \
              --permissions="apigee.proxies.create" --stage=GA
            ```
    *   Refer to the [Apigee roles documentation on GCP](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/understanding-roles#apigee-roles) for more information.

## Tool Configuration

1.  **Prepare `input.properties`:**
    Create an `input.properties` file in the **root directory** of the project. This file contains essential configuration for the tool to connect to your Apigee environments.
    Sample input files are available in the `sample/inputs/` directory:
    *   [Edge OPDK sample: `sample/inputs/opdk.input.properties`](sample/inputs/opdk.input.properties)
    *   [Edge SaaS sample: `sample/inputs/saas.input.properties`](sample/inputs/saas.input.properties)
    *   [X/Hybrid sample: `sample/inputs/x.input.properties`](sample/inputs/x.input.properties)

    The following table details the required properties within the `[input]` section of your `input.properties` file:

    | Section | Property                | Description                                                                 |
    | :------ | :---------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_URL`            | Management URL of your source Apigee environment (OPDK, Edge, X, or Hybrid). |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_ORG`            | Name of your source Apigee organization.                                   |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_AUTH_TYPE`      | Authentication type for the source: `basic` or `oauth`.                     |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_APIGEE_VERSION` | Flavor of your source Apigee: `OPDK`, `SAAS`, `X`, or `HYBRID`.             |
    | `input` | `TARGET_URL`            | Management URL of your target Apigee X/Hybrid environment (Global or DRZ URL).|
    | `input` | `GCP_PROJECT_ID`        | GCP Project ID where your target Apigee X/Hybrid instance is running.       |
    | `input` | `TARGET_DIR`            | Name of the directory where exported Apigee objects and reports will be saved (e.g., `output`). |
    | `input` | `TARGET_COMPARE`        | Set to `true` to export apigee objects from target environment and compare with source. Set to `false` to avoid export and compare. |
    | `input` | `SSL_VERIFICATION`      | Set to `false` to ignore SSL certificate verification, or `true` to enforce it. |

2.  **Authentication Tokens:**
    Export the necessary authentication tokens as environment variables before running the tool.

    *   **For Source: Apigee Edge (SaaS/OPDK) or Apigee X/Hybrid:**
        *   **Basic Auth (Edge):**
            ```bash
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(echo -n '<your-username>:<your-password>' | base64)
            ```
        *   **OAuth2/SAML (Edge):**
            Refer to the [Apigee Edge Management API documentation](https://docs.apigee.com/api-platform/system-administration/management-api-overview) for generating OAuth2 tokens.
            ```bash
            # Example using a helper script like get_token
            export SSO_LOGIN_URL=https://login.apigee.com # Adjust if necessary
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(get_token -u <your-username>:<your-password> -m <your-mfa-code>)
            ```
        *   **OAuth2 (Apigee X/Hybrid as Source):**
            ```bash
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
            ```

    *   **For Target: Apigee X/Hybrid:**
        ```bash
        export APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
        ```

## Running the Tool

The primary script for running the assessment is `main.py`.

### Command-Line Arguments

*   `--resources <resource_list>`: Specifies the Apigee objects to assess.
    *   Use `all` to assess all supported resources.
    *   Provide a comma-separated list for selective assessment.
    *   **Available Environment-Level Resources:** `targetservers`, `keyvaluemaps`, `references`, `resourcefiles`, `keystores`, `flowhooks`
    *   **Available Organization-Level Resources:** `org_keyvaluemaps`, `developers`, `apiproducts`, `apis`, `apps`, `sharedflows`

    **Examples:**
    ```bash
    # Assess all resources
    python3 main.py --resources all

    # Assess only TargetServers and KVMs
    python3 main.py --resources targetservers,keyvaluemaps

    # Assess Keystores and Apps
    python3 main.py --resources keystores,apps
    ```

### Running Locally

Ensure you have configured `input.properties` and exported authentication tokens as described above.
```bash
python3 main.py --resources <your_selected_resources>
```
> Note: `export IGNORE_VIZ="true"` can be leveraged to skip generation of graph visualization for the migration artifacts.

### Running with Docker

1.  **Create an output directory on your host machine:** This directory will be mounted into the container to store the assessment results.
    ```bash
    mkdir output
    sudo chmod 777 output # Ensure the container can write to this directory
    ```
2.  **Set the Docker image variable:**
    ```bash
    # If using the pre-built image
    export DOCKER_IMAGE="ghcr.io/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/apigee-migration-assessment-tool:latest"
    # Or, if you built your own
    # export DOCKER_IMAGE="<your-image-name>:<your-tag>"
    ```
3.  **Run the Docker container:**
    ```bash
    docker run --rm \
        -v "$(pwd)/output:/app/target" \
        -v "$(pwd)/input.properties:/app/input.properties" \
        -e SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN="$SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN" \
        -e APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN="$APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN" \
        "$DOCKER_IMAGE" --resources all
    ```
    *(Adjust `--resources` as needed.)*

    > Note: `-e IGNORE_VIZ="true"` can be leveraged to skip generation of graph visualization for the migration artifacts.

## Accessing the Report and Visualization

The tool generates the following outputs in the directory specified by `TARGET_DIR` in your `input.properties` (e.g., `./output/`):

1.  **Assessment Report:**
    *   Filename: `qualification_report.xlsx`
    *   This Excel file contains the detailed findings of the assessment.
    *   A sample report can be found at [`sample/outputs/sample_qualification_report.xlsx`](sample/outputs/sample_qualification_report.xlsx).

2.  **Topology Visualization (for OPDK source):**
    *   Filename: `visualization.html`
    *   Open this HTML file in a web browser to view a diagram of your Apigee OPDK topology.
    *   A sample visualization is shown below:
        ![Sample Apigee Topology Visualization](assets/visualization.png)

## Project Structure Overview

*   `main.py`: The main executable script for the tool.
*   `input.properties`: Main configuration file (user-created).
*   `backend.properties`: Internal configuration for the tool.
*   `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies.
*   `Dockerfile`: For building the Docker image.
*   `assessment_mapping/`, `assessment_mapping_json/`: Contains mappings and definitions for assessing various Apigee resources.
*   `qualification_report_mapping/`, `qualification_report_mapping_json/`: Defines the structure and content of the Excel qualification report.
*   `sample/`: Contains sample input files and an example output report.
    *   `sample/inputs/`: Example `input.properties` files for different Apigee platforms.
    *   `sample/outputs/`: An example of the `qualification_report.xlsx`.
*   `assets/`: Contains static assets like images for documentation.
*   `.github/`: GitHub Actions workflows for CI/CD (linting, testing, publishing).

## Contributing

We welcome contributions from the community! If you would like to contribute to this project, please see our [Contribution Guidelines](./CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

All solutions within this repository are provided under the [Apache 2.0 License](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0). Please see the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for more detailed terms and conditions.

## Disclaimer

This repository and its contents are not an official Google product.

Commit message:

feat: API Traffic Report - Issue 73

README.md, after:

# Apigee Migration Assessment Tool

[![Static Checks](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/static-checks.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/static-checks.yml)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/actions/workflows/tests.yml)

This tool helps you plan your migration from Apigee Edge, Apigee X, or Apigee Hybrid to a target Apigee X or Apigee Hybrid environment by analyzing your source Apigee setup and generating a comprehensive assessment report.

## Assessment Scenarios

The following migration paths are supported:

| Source Apigee Platform | Target Apigee Platform |
| :--------------------- | :--------------------- |
| Apigee Edge (SaaS)     | Apigee X               |
| Apigee Edge (SaaS)     | Apigee Hybrid          |
| Apigee Edge (OPDK)     | Apigee X               |
| Apigee Edge (OPDK)     | Apigee Hybrid          |
| Apigee Hybrid          | Apigee X               |
| Apigee X               | Apigee Hybrid          |

## Prerequisites

You can run this tool locally using Python or via a Docker container.

### Local Setup

1.  **Install Graphviz:** Follow the official installation instructions for your operating system from [graphviz.org/download/](https://graphviz.org/download/).
2.  **Create and activate a Python virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv dev
    source dev/bin/activate
    ```
    *(Note: On Windows, use `dev\Scripts\activate`)*
3.  **Install Python dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

### Docker Setup

1.  **Use a pre-built Docker image (recommended):**
    ```bash
    docker pull ghcr.io/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/apigee-migration-assessment-tool:latest
    ```
    **OR**

    **Build the Docker image from source:**
    ```bash
    # Build the image
    docker build -t <your-image-name>:<your-tag> .

    # (Optional) Push to your container registry
    # docker push <your-image-name>:<your-tag>
    ```

2.  **Run the Docker image:**
    *(See the "Running the Tool with Docker" section below for detailed examples.)*

## Apigee Permissions

The tool requires specific permissions to access and analyze your Apigee environments.

*   **Source: Apigee Edge (SaaS/OPDK)**
    *   Assign the `Read-only Organization Administrator` role to the user account that will be used by the tool.
    *   Refer to the [Apigee Edge built-in roles documentation](https://docs.apigee.com/api-platform/system-administration/edge-built-roles) for more details.

*   **Source/Target: Apigee X/Hybrid**
    *   The tool needs read-only access to organization and environment-level objects, plus permissions to validate APIs. Assign the following to the relevant user or service account:
        *   The built-in role: `roles/apigee.readOnlyAdmin`
        *   A custom role with the `apigee.proxies.create` permission. You can create this role using gcloud:
            ```bash
            gcloud iam roles create ApigeeAPIValidator --project=<YOUR_GCP_PROJECT_ID> \
              --title="Apigee API Validator" --description="Allows Apigee API proxy creation for validation" \
              --permissions="apigee.proxies.create" --stage=GA
            ```
    *   Refer to the [Apigee roles documentation on GCP](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/understanding-roles#apigee-roles) for more information.

## Tool Configuration

1.  **Prepare `input.properties`:**
    Create an `input.properties` file in the **root directory** of the project. This file contains essential configuration for the tool to connect to your Apigee environments.
    Sample input files are available in the `sample/inputs/` directory:
    *   [Edge OPDK sample: `sample/inputs/opdk.input.properties`](sample/inputs/opdk.input.properties)
    *   [Edge SaaS sample: `sample/inputs/saas.input.properties`](sample/inputs/saas.input.properties)
    *   [X/Hybrid sample: `sample/inputs/x.input.properties`](sample/inputs/x.input.properties)

    The following table details the required properties within the `[input]` section of your `input.properties` file:

    | Section | Property                | Description                                                                 |
    | :------ | :---------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_URL`            | Management URL of your source Apigee environment (OPDK, Edge, X, or Hybrid). |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_ORG`            | Name of your source Apigee organization.                                   |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_AUTH_TYPE`      | Authentication type for the source: `basic` or `oauth`.                     |
    | `input` | `SOURCE_APIGEE_VERSION` | Flavor of your source Apigee: `OPDK`, `SAAS`, `X`, or `HYBRID`.             |
    | `input` | `TARGET_URL`            | Management URL of your target Apigee X/Hybrid environment (Global or DRZ URL).|
    | `input` | `GCP_PROJECT_ID`        | GCP Project ID where your target Apigee X/Hybrid instance is running.       |
    | `input` | `TARGET_DIR`            | Name of the directory where exported Apigee objects and reports will be saved (e.g., `output`). |
    | `input` | `TARGET_COMPARE`        | Set to `true` to export apigee objects from target environment and compare with source. Set to `false` to avoid export and compare. |
    | `input` | `SSL_VERIFICATION`      | Set to `false` to ignore SSL certificate verification, or `true` to enforce it. |
    | `input` | `ANALYTICS_START_DATE`  | If exporting API Traffic, the start date of the range to export (max 6 months). Format: `MM/DD/YYYY` |
    | `input` | `ANALYTICS_END_DATE`    | If exporting API Traffic, the start date of the range to export. Format: `MM/DD/YYYY` |

2.  **Authentication Tokens:**
    Export the necessary authentication tokens as environment variables before running the tool.

    *   **For Source: Apigee Edge (SaaS/OPDK) or Apigee X/Hybrid:**
        *   **Basic Auth (Edge):**
            ```bash
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(echo -n '<your-username>:<your-password>' | base64)
            ```
        *   **OAuth2/SAML (Edge):**
            Refer to the [Apigee Edge Management API documentation](https://docs.apigee.com/api-platform/system-administration/management-api-overview) for generating OAuth2 tokens.
            ```bash
            # Example using a helper script like get_token
            export SSO_LOGIN_URL=https://login.apigee.com # Adjust if necessary
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(get_token -u <your-username>:<your-password> -m <your-mfa-code>)
            ```
        *   **OAuth2 (Apigee X/Hybrid as Source):**
            ```bash
            export SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
            ```

    *   **For Target: Apigee X/Hybrid:**
        ```bash
        export APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
        ```

## Running the Tool

The primary script for running the assessment is `main.py`.

### Command-Line Arguments

*   `--resources <resource_list>`: Specifies the Apigee objects to assess.
    *   Use `all` to assess all supported resources.
    *   Provide a comma-separated list for selective assessment.
    *   **Available Environment-Level Resources:** `targetservers`, `keyvaluemaps`, `references`, `resourcefiles`, `keystores`, `flowhooks`
    *   **Available Organization-Level Resources:** `org_keyvaluemaps`, `developers`, `apiproducts`, `apis`, `apps`, `sharedflows`
    *   **Retrieve API Traffic:** `api_traffic`

    **Examples:**
    ```bash
    # Assess all resources
    python3 main.py --resources all

    # Assess only TargetServers and KVMs
    python3 main.py --resources targetservers,keyvaluemaps

    # Assess Keystores and Apps
    python3 main.py --resources keystores,apps
    ```

#### Getting API Traffic

The assessment tool can retrieve API traffic seen within a specified time range. This allows you to see what APIs may not need to be migrated at all if there is no data. 

Set the start and end date in the `input.properties` file. The script will automatically set the start timestamp to 00:00 on the start date and 23:59 on the end date, and aggregate total traffic during that range. 

When `--resources api_traffic` is used, the report will only include APIs that *have* received traffic in the specified time period. To get traffic for *all* APIs (which will include zeroes for proxies with no traffic), you need to use `--resources apis,api_traffic` (or `--resources all`).


### Running Locally

Ensure you have configured `input.properties` and exported authentication tokens as described above.
```bash
python3 main.py --resources <your_selected_resources>
```
> Note: `export IGNORE_VIZ="true"` can be leveraged to skip generation of graph visualization for the migration artifacts.

### Running with Docker

1.  **Create an output directory on your host machine:** This directory will be mounted into the container to store the assessment results.
    ```bash
    mkdir output
    sudo chmod 777 output # Ensure the container can write to this directory
    ```
2.  **Set the Docker image variable:**
    ```bash
    # If using the pre-built image
    export DOCKER_IMAGE="ghcr.io/apigee/apigee-migration-assessment-tool/apigee-migration-assessment-tool:latest"
    # Or, if you built your own
    # export DOCKER_IMAGE="<your-image-name>:<your-tag>"
    ```
3.  **Run the Docker container:**
    ```bash
    docker run --rm \
        -v "$(pwd)/output:/app/target" \
        -v "$(pwd)/input.properties:/app/input.properties" \
        -e SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN="$SOURCE_AUTH_TOKEN" \
        -e APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN="$APIGEE_ACCESS_TOKEN" \
        "$DOCKER_IMAGE" --resources all
    ```
    *(Adjust `--resources` as needed.)*

    > Note: `-e IGNORE_VIZ="true"` can be leveraged to skip generation of graph visualization for the migration artifacts.

## Accessing the Report and Visualization

The tool generates the following outputs in the directory specified by `TARGET_DIR` in your `input.properties` (e.g., `./output/`):

1.  **Assessment Report:**
    *   Filename: `qualification_report.xlsx`
    *   This Excel file contains the detailed findings of the assessment.
    *   A sample report can be found at [`sample/outputs/sample_qualification_report.xlsx`](sample/outputs/sample_qualification_report.xlsx).

2.  **Topology Visualization (for OPDK source):**
    *   Filename: `visualization.html`
    *   Open this HTML file in a web browser to view a diagram of your Apigee OPDK topology.
    *   A sample visualization is shown below:
        ![Sample Apigee Topology Visualization](assets/visualization.png)

## Project Structure Overview

*   `main.py`: The main executable script for the tool.
*   `input.properties`: Main configuration file (user-created).
*   `backend.properties`: Internal configuration for the tool.
*   `requirements.txt`: Python dependencies.
*   `Dockerfile`: For building the Docker image.
*   `assessment_mapping/`, `assessment_mapping_json/`: Contains mappings and definitions for assessing various Apigee resources.
*   `qualification_report_mapping/`, `qualification_report_mapping_json/`: Defines the structure and content of the Excel qualification report.
*   `sample/`: Contains sample input files and an example output report.
    *   `sample/inputs/`: Example `input.properties` files for different Apigee platforms.
    *   `sample/outputs/`: An example of the `qualification_report.xlsx`.
*   `assets/`: Contains static assets like images for documentation.
*   `.github/`: GitHub Actions workflows for CI/CD (linting, testing, publishing).

## Contributing

We welcome contributions from the community! If you would like to contribute to this project, please see our [Contribution Guidelines](./CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

All solutions within this repository are provided under the [Apache 2.0 License](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0). Please see the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for more detailed terms and conditions.

## Disclaimer

This repository and its contents are not an official Google product.
